src/docs/index.adoc, before:

= GR8 CRM - Feature Plugin
Göran Ehrsson <goran@technipelago.se>
:toc:
:numbered:
:icons: font
:imagesdir: ./images
:source-highlighter: prettify
:homepage: http://gr8crm.github.io
:gr8crm: GR8 CRM
:gr8source: https://github.com/goeh/grails-crm-feature
:license: This plugin is licensed with http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.html[Apache License version 2.0]

== Introduction

{gr8crm} is a set of http://www.grails.org/[Grails Web Application Framework]
plugins that makes it easy to develop web applications with CRM functionality.

You can find more information about {gr8crm} on the main documentation site {homepage}.

=== Customer relationship management
Customer relationship management (CRM) is a system for managing a company’s interactions with current and future customers.
It involves using technology to organize, automate and synchronize sales, marketing, customer service, and technical support.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Customer_relationship_management[Wikipedia]

The {gr8crm} "Ecosystem" currently contains over 40 Grails plugins. For a complete list of plugins see {homepage}.

Each {gr8crm} plugin defines a http://martinfowler.com/bliki/BoundedContext.html[Bounded Context]
that focus on one specific domain, for example *contact*, *project* or *document*.

== CRM Feature Plugin

The `crm-feature` plugin manages installed *features* in a {gr8crm} application. A feature is a unit of functionality that can be
enabled or disabled per user role. Application code can check if a feature is enabled before doing some work.
Typically one {gr8crm} plugin provides one feature but there is no limit to the number of features a plugin can provide.

== Adding features to an application

Features can be added to an application in two ways.

1. Add a *features* property to the plugin descriptor
2. Adding features using CrmFeatureService

=== Add a feature property to the plugin descriptor

If a plugin provides a feature, the easiest way to add it to the application is by adding
a property called `features` to the plugin descriptor. The features property must return a Map or a Closure.

[source,groovy]
----
class CrmContactGrailsPlugin {
    ...
    def features = [name: "crmContact", description: "Contact Management",
                        enabled: true, main: [controller: 'crmContact']]
}
----

If you prefer the Closure variant it follows the same structure.

[source,groovy]
----
class CrmAgreementGrailsPlugin {
    ....
    def features = {
        crmAgreement {
            description "Agreement Management"
            main        controller: "crmAgreement", action: "index"
            enabled     false // this is default
        }
    }
}
----

==== Feature DSL

The feature plugin scans all installed plugins and look for a `features` property in the plugin descriptor.
If the plugin has a `features` property it is parsed by the *Feature DSL* parser. The following example is from the
`crm-tags` plugin. It provides tagging support in a {gr8crm} application. A feature with name *crmTag* will be
installed in the application. The feature DSL also specifies standard permissions for common user roles.

[source,groovy]
.CrmTagsGrailsPlugin.groovy
----
def features = {
    crmTag {
        description "Tag domain instances with user-defined labels"
        permissions {
            guest "crmTag:list"
            partner "crmTag:list"
            user "crmTag:*"
            admin "crmTag,crmTagAdmin:*"
        }
        theme "premium" // Feature is only available to tenants with the premium theme.
        required true
        hidden true
    }
}
----

==== Feature Permissions

In the above example the *crmTag* feature DSL specifies a set of standard permissions that will be declared in th application.
Users with the role *guest* will only get permission to call the *list* action on the *crmTag* controller.
Users with role *user* call all actions on the *crmTag* controller. And the role *admin* can also call admin actions.

A developer can programatically add more roles and permissions if needed, but the feature DSL is an easy way to add necessary
permissions during application startup.

==== Required/Default Features

The `required true` statement specifies that this feature is required, it will be enabled for all users and roles automatically.

==== Hidden Features

The `hidden true` statement specifies that this feature should not be displayed in any *feature settings* pages.
It's a default/required feature so there is no reason to let the application administrator enable or disable it.

==== Theme Features

The `theme` statement specifies that the feature is only available to tenants that uses a specific CRM theme.

=== Adding features using CrmFeatureService

You can also add features to the application by calling `crmFeatureService.addApplicationFeature(Map metadata)`.

[source,groovy]
----
def metadata = [name:"awesome", description: "This feature is awesome", controller: "awesome", action: "index"]
crmFeatureService.addApplicationFeature(metadata)
----

=== Enabling/disabling features programatically

Although many features can be available in an application, features are normally not enabled by default.
Application code can enable features for specific user roles and/or tenants.

[source,groovy]
----
Long tenant = grails.crm.core.TenantUtils.tenant
String role = "VIP_ROLE"
crmFeatureService.enableFeature("awesome", role, tenant)
----

You can also make it possible for system administrators to enable features on-demand,
this is however application specific and can be implemented with code like above.

=== Check if feature is enabled

[source,groovy]
----
Long tenant = grails.crm.core.TenantUtils.tenant
if(crmFeatureService.hasFeature("awesome", null, tenant)) {
    // The "awesome" feature is installed and enabled for all roles, great!
}
----

=== Get metadata for a feature

Each feature provide a set of [metadata|guide:feature-metadata] properties.

[source,groovy]
----
Map metadata = crmFeatureService.getFeature("awesome");
assert metadata.description == "This feature is awesome"

// null is returned if the feature is not installed
assert crmFeatureService.getFeature("not installed") == null
----

[NOTE]
====
You can read metadata for a feature even though the feature is not enabled.
====


== Services

The *crm-feature* plugin provide a service called `CrmFeatureService`.
This service contains methods for enabling/disabling features for users and roles.

=== CrmFeatureService

`List<Feature> getApplicationFeatures()`

Returns all the features that are available in the application, even disabled features are included.

`Feature getApplicationFeature(final String name)`

Returns metadata for a specific application feature. A metadata instance has the following properties:

|===
|*Attribute* | *Description*
|name        | The unique name of the feature
|description | Short text that describes the feature
|enabled     | If *true* the feature will be enabled by default, otherwise features are disabled by default.
|role        | If `enabled` is *true* the feature can optionally be enabled for a specific role (String)
|tenant      | If `enabled` is *true* the feature can optionally be enabled for a specific tenant (Long)
|info        | (recommended) Map with parameters to createLink() to access this feature's information page
|admin       | (optional) Map with parameters to createLink() to access this feature's administration page
|main        | (optional) Map with parameters to createLink() to access this feature's start page
|===

The properties `info`, `help`, `admin` and `main` contains a Map with the following properties:

|===
|*Property*  | *Description*
|controller  | *controller* attribute for createLink()
|action      | (optional) *action* attribute for createLink()
|mapping     | (optional) named URL mapping to use to rewrite the link
|params      | (optional) *params* attribute for createLink()
|===

`removeApplicationFeature(String name)`

To remove a feature you normally disable it instead of removing it.
If an unwanted feature is the only feature provided by a plugin, it's probably better to uninstall the plugin completely.
But there may be occasions where you want one feature from a plugin that provides several features. In that
case you can remove unwanted features at application startup. For example in BootStrap.groovy.

[source,groovy]
.BootStrap.groovy
----
crmFeatureService.removeApplicationFeature("facebook")
----

`void enableFeature(def features, Long tenant = null, String role = null, Date expires = null)`

Enable a feature for a specific user role or for all roles in a tenant.
The `features` parameter can be a feature name or a collection of feature names.
If no `tenant` is specified then the current executing tenant will be used.
If no `role` is specified then the feature will be enabled for all roles in the tenant.
An expiration date can be specified. When the date has passed the feature will be disabled.
This can be used to provide a *trial period* where a feature will be enabled for a limited period.

`void disableFeature(def features, Long tenant = null, String role = null)`

Disable a feature for a specific user role or for all roles in a tenant.
The `features` parameter can be a feature name or a collection of feature names.
If no `tenant` is specified then the current executing tenant will be used.
If no `role` is specified then the feature will be disabled for all roles in the tenant.

`boolean hasFeature(final String feature, Long tenant = null, String role = null)`

Check if a feature is enabled.
If no `tenant` is specified then the current executing tenant will be used.
If no `role` is specified then it will check if the feature is enabled for all users in the tenant.

`List<Feature> getFeatures(Long tenant = null, String role = null)`

List all enabled features.
If no `tenant` is specified then features enabled in the current executing tenant will be returned.
If no `role` is specified then all features enabled in the tenant will be returned.

== Tag Libraries

The `crm-feature` plugin provides a few GSP tags under the `crm` namespace.

=== featureLink

This tag renders a hyperlink to the main controller of a feature, if the feature is enabled for the current user.

|===
|*Attribute*         | *Description*
|feature             | Name of feature
|tenant              | Render link only if the feature is enabled in the specified tenant (default = current tenant)
|role                | Render link only if the feature is enabled for the specified user role
|enabled             | if *true* bypass checks and render the link even if the feature is not enabled
|nolink              | If *true* and the feature has no main controller, render tag body (but no hyperlink)
|===

=== hasFeature

Check if a feature is enabled and render the tag body if it is.

|===
|*Attribute*         | *Description*
|feature             | Name of feature
|tenant              | Render tag body only if the feature is enabled in the specified tenant (default = current tenant)
|role                | Render tag body only if the feature is enabled for the specified user role
|===

=== eachFeature

Iterate over all enabled features and render tag body for each iteration.

|===
|*Attribute*         | *Description*
|tenant              | Render tag body only if the feature is enabled in the specified tenant (default = current tenant)
|role                | Render tag body only if the feature is enabled for the specified user role
|var                 | Name of iteration variable (default = "it")
|status              | Name of iteration count variable
|===

[IMPORTANT]
====
An important design philosophy with {gr8crm} is to avoid tight coupling between plugins. This means that if you
develop a {gr8crm} plugin you should try to avoid checking if features from other plugins are installed or not.

The application is the container that knows about all installed plugins and you are free to check for feature availability
in application code, but you should avoid checking for features in plugin code. Use events instead.
====

== Changes

2.4.1:: A feature can now be tied to a theme. Only tenants with that theme will have access to the feature
2.4.0:: First version compatible with Grails 2.4.4.
2.0.1:: A feature can now be tied to a theme. Only tenants with that theme will have access to the feature
2.0.0:: First public release

== License

This plugin is licensed with http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.html[Apache License version 2.0]

== Source Code

The source code for this plugin is available at https://github.com/goeh/grails-crm-core

== Contributing

Please report {gr8source}/issues[issues or suggestions].

Want to improve the plugin: Fork the {gr8source}[repository] and send a pull request.

Commit message:

The method hasFeature now uses the current tenant if no tenant is specified

src/docs/index.adoc, after:

= GR8 CRM - Feature Plugin
Göran Ehrsson <goran@technipelago.se>
:toc:
:numbered:
:icons: font
:imagesdir: ./images
:source-highlighter: prettify
:homepage: http://gr8crm.github.io
:gr8crm: GR8 CRM
:gr8source: https://github.com/goeh/grails-crm-feature
:license: This plugin is licensed with http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.html[Apache License version 2.0]

== Introduction

{gr8crm} is a set of http://www.grails.org/[Grails Web Application Framework]
plugins that makes it easy to develop web applications with CRM functionality.

You can find more information about {gr8crm} on the main documentation site {homepage}.

=== Customer relationship management
Customer relationship management (CRM) is a system for managing a company’s interactions with current and future customers.
It involves using technology to organize, automate and synchronize sales, marketing, customer service, and technical support.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Customer_relationship_management[Wikipedia]

The {gr8crm} "Ecosystem" currently contains over 40 Grails plugins. For a complete list of plugins see {homepage}.

Each {gr8crm} plugin defines a http://martinfowler.com/bliki/BoundedContext.html[Bounded Context]
that focus on one specific domain, for example *contact*, *project* or *document*.

== CRM Feature Plugin

The `crm-feature` plugin manages installed *features* in a {gr8crm} application. A feature is a unit of functionality that can be
enabled or disabled per user role. Application code can check if a feature is enabled before doing some work.
Typically one {gr8crm} plugin provides one feature but there is no limit to the number of features a plugin can provide.

== Adding features to an application

Features can be added to an application in two ways.

1. Add a *features* property to the plugin descriptor
2. Adding features using CrmFeatureService

=== Add a feature property to the plugin descriptor

If a plugin provides a feature, the easiest way to add it to the application is by adding
a property called `features` to the plugin descriptor. The features property must return a Map or a Closure.

[source,groovy]
----
class CrmContactGrailsPlugin {
    ...
    def features = [name: "crmContact", description: "Contact Management",
                        enabled: true, main: [controller: 'crmContact']]
}
----

If you prefer the Closure variant it follows the same structure.

[source,groovy]
----
class CrmAgreementGrailsPlugin {
    ....
    def features = {
        crmAgreement {
            description "Agreement Management"
            main        controller: "crmAgreement", action: "index"
            enabled     false // this is default
        }
    }
}
----

==== Feature DSL

The feature plugin scans all installed plugins and look for a `features` property in the plugin descriptor.
If the plugin has a `features` property it is parsed by the *Feature DSL* parser. The following example is from the
`crm-tags` plugin. It provides tagging support in a {gr8crm} application. A feature with name *crmTag* will be
installed in the application. The feature DSL also specifies standard permissions for common user roles.

[source,groovy]
.CrmTagsGrailsPlugin.groovy
----
def features = {
    crmTag {
        description "Tag domain instances with user-defined labels"
        permissions {
            guest "crmTag:list"
            partner "crmTag:list"
            user "crmTag:*"
            admin "crmTag,crmTagAdmin:*"
        }
        theme "premium" // Feature is only available to tenants with the premium theme.
        required true
        hidden true
    }
}
----

==== Feature Permissions

In the above example the *crmTag* feature DSL specifies a set of standard permissions that will be declared in th application.
Users with the role *guest* will only get permission to call the *list* action on the *crmTag* controller.
Users with role *user* call all actions on the *crmTag* controller. And the role *admin* can also call admin actions.

A developer can programatically add more roles and permissions if needed, but the feature DSL is an easy way to add necessary
permissions during application startup.

==== Required/Default Features

The `required true` statement specifies that this feature is required, it will be enabled for all users and roles automatically.

==== Hidden Features

The `hidden true` statement specifies that this feature should not be displayed in any *feature settings* pages.
It's a default/required feature so there is no reason to let the application administrator enable or disable it.

==== Theme Features

The `theme` statement specifies that the feature is only available to tenants that uses a specific CRM theme.

=== Adding features using CrmFeatureService

You can also add features to the application by calling `crmFeatureService.addApplicationFeature(Map metadata)`.

[source,groovy]
----
def metadata = [name:"awesome", description: "This feature is awesome", controller: "awesome", action: "index"]
crmFeatureService.addApplicationFeature(metadata)
----

=== Enabling/disabling features programatically

Although many features can be available in an application, features are normally not enabled by default.
Application code can enable features for specific user roles and/or tenants.

[source,groovy]
----
Long tenant = grails.crm.core.TenantUtils.tenant
String role = "VIP_ROLE"
crmFeatureService.enableFeature("awesome", role, tenant)
----

You can also make it possible for system administrators to enable features on-demand,
this is however application specific and can be implemented with code like above.

=== Check if feature is enabled

[source,groovy]
----
Long tenant = grails.crm.core.TenantUtils.tenant
if(crmFeatureService.hasFeature("awesome", null, tenant)) {
    // The "awesome" feature is installed and enabled for all roles, great!
}
----

=== Get metadata for a feature

Each feature provide a set of [metadata|guide:feature-metadata] properties.

[source,groovy]
----
Map metadata = crmFeatureService.getFeature("awesome");
assert metadata.description == "This feature is awesome"

// null is returned if the feature is not installed
assert crmFeatureService.getFeature("not installed") == null
----

[NOTE]
====
You can read metadata for a feature even though the feature is not enabled.
====


== Services

The *crm-feature* plugin provide a service called `CrmFeatureService`.
This service contains methods for enabling/disabling features for users and roles.

=== CrmFeatureService

`List<Feature> getApplicationFeatures()`

Returns all the features that are available in the application, even disabled features are included.

`Feature getApplicationFeature(final String name)`

Returns metadata for a specific application feature. A metadata instance has the following properties:

|===
|*Attribute* | *Description*
|name        | The unique name of the feature
|description | Short text that describes the feature
|enabled     | If *true* the feature will be enabled by default, otherwise features are disabled by default.
|role        | If `enabled` is *true* the feature can optionally be enabled for a specific role (String)
|tenant      | If `enabled` is *true* the feature can optionally be enabled for a specific tenant (Long)
|info        | (recommended) Map with parameters to createLink() to access this feature's information page
|admin       | (optional) Map with parameters to createLink() to access this feature's administration page
|main        | (optional) Map with parameters to createLink() to access this feature's start page
|===

The properties `info`, `help`, `admin` and `main` contains a Map with the following properties:

|===
|*Property*  | *Description*
|controller  | *controller* attribute for createLink()
|action      | (optional) *action* attribute for createLink()
|mapping     | (optional) named URL mapping to use to rewrite the link
|params      | (optional) *params* attribute for createLink()
|===

`removeApplicationFeature(String name)`

To remove a feature you normally disable it instead of removing it.
If an unwanted feature is the only feature provided by a plugin, it's probably better to uninstall the plugin completely.
But there may be occasions where you want one feature from a plugin that provides several features. In that
case you can remove unwanted features at application startup. For example in BootStrap.groovy.

[source,groovy]
.BootStrap.groovy
----
crmFeatureService.removeApplicationFeature("facebook")
----

`void enableFeature(def features, Long tenant = null, String role = null, Date expires = null)`

Enable a feature for a specific user role or for all roles in a tenant.
The `features` parameter can be a feature name or a collection of feature names.
If no `tenant` is specified then the current executing tenant will be used.
If no `role` is specified then the feature will be enabled for all roles in the tenant.
An expiration date can be specified. When the date has passed the feature will be disabled.
This can be used to provide a *trial period* where a feature will be enabled for a limited period.

`void disableFeature(def features, Long tenant = null, String role = null)`

Disable a feature for a specific user role or for all roles in a tenant.
The `features` parameter can be a feature name or a collection of feature names.
If no `tenant` is specified then the current executing tenant will be used.
If no `role` is specified then the feature will be disabled for all roles in the tenant.

`boolean hasFeature(final String feature, Long tenant = null, String role = null)`

Check if a feature is enabled.
If no `tenant` is specified then the current executing tenant will be used.
If no `role` is specified then it will check if the feature is enabled for all users in the tenant.

`List<Feature> getFeatures(Long tenant = null, String role = null)`

List all enabled features.
If no `tenant` is specified then features enabled in the current executing tenant will be returned.
If no `role` is specified then all features enabled in the tenant will be returned.

== Tag Libraries

The `crm-feature` plugin provides a few GSP tags under the `crm` namespace.

=== featureLink

This tag renders a hyperlink to the main controller of a feature, if the feature is enabled for the current user.

|===
|*Attribute*         | *Description*
|feature             | Name of feature
|tenant              | Render link only if the feature is enabled in the specified tenant (default = current tenant)
|role                | Render link only if the feature is enabled for the specified user role
|enabled             | if *true* bypass checks and render the link even if the feature is not enabled
|nolink              | If *true* and the feature has no main controller, render tag body (but no hyperlink)
|===

=== hasFeature

Check if a feature is enabled and render the tag body if it is.

|===
|*Attribute*         | *Description*
|feature             | Name of feature
|tenant              | Render tag body only if the feature is enabled in the specified tenant (default = current tenant)
|role                | Render tag body only if the feature is enabled for the specified user role
|===

=== eachFeature

Iterate over all enabled features and render tag body for each iteration.

|===
|*Attribute*         | *Description*
|tenant              | Render tag body only if the feature is enabled in the specified tenant (default = current tenant)
|role                | Render tag body only if the feature is enabled for the specified user role
|var                 | Name of iteration variable (default = "it")
|status              | Name of iteration count variable
|===

[IMPORTANT]
====
An important design philosophy with {gr8crm} is to avoid tight coupling between plugins. This means that if you
develop a {gr8crm} plugin you should try to avoid checking if features from other plugins are installed or not.

The application is the container that knows about all installed plugins and you are free to check for feature availability
in application code, but you should avoid checking for features in plugin code. Use events instead.
====

== Changes

2.4.2:: The method `hasFeature(String name, Long tenant, String role)` now uses the current tenant if no tenant is specified
2.4.1:: A feature can now be tied to a theme. Only tenants with that theme will have access to the feature
2.4.0:: First version compatible with Grails 2.4.4.
2.0.1:: A feature can now be tied to a theme. Only tenants with that theme will have access to the feature
2.0.0:: First public release

== License

This plugin is licensed with http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.html[Apache License version 2.0]

== Source Code

The source code for this plugin is available at https://github.com/goeh/grails-crm-core

== Contributing

Please report {gr8source}/issues[issues or suggestions].

Want to improve the plugin: Fork the {gr8source}[repository] and send a pull request.
